Nessie retention and garbage collection: real mechanism, and the policy chosen for this
project. Not narrated speculation: mechanism details below are drawn directly from
Nessie's own docs (projectnessie.org/nessie-latest/gc/ and .../guides/management/,
fetched 2026-08-05) and cross-checked against the live commit log evidence in this same
directory (04 and 07). Nothing here was run against the live stack: this is a policy
decision and a documented, not-yet-scheduled, command, per this work package's scope
(building an actual scheduler is out of scope).

WHAT ACTUALLY EXPIRES, AND WHAT DOESN'T
----------------------------------------
Nessie's own commit graph (every commit, on every branch, forever) is never
automatically pruned. It lives in this project's Postgres JDBC store
(infra/docker-compose.yml's nessie service, nessie.version.store.type: JDBC) and grows
with every write: this project's own commit log evidence shows 3 real commits for one
small demo table's 2 inserts plus its CREATE, and separately, ordinary dbt/elementary
bookkeeping activity produces several more commits per single `dbt run` invocation
(confirmed live while investigating this: a GET on main's history around an ordinary
dbt run showed dbt_invocations, dbt_run_results, elementary_test_results each getting
their own commit). Each commit row itself is small (no table data, just metadata), so
Postgres growth from the commit graph alone is not the laptop-storage risk this policy
exists to bound.

The real risk is MinIO: every commit's data files, manifests, and metadata.json persist
in s3://warehouse/... for as long as any named reference's history can still reach them,
and nothing deletes them automatically. A table rebuilt repeatedly during normal
development (dbt full-refresh, WAP branches, ad hoc demo work like this one) leaves an
ever-growing trail of superseded files behind it, because this catalog's single-
snapshot-per-commit design (docs/evidence/time-travel/10-root-cause-confirmation.txt)
also means Iceberg's own `expire_snapshots` procedure has essentially nothing to expire
per table (there is only ever one live snapshot to find), so it is not a usable lever
here for the concern it normally addresses.

The actual tool for this is a separate program, nessie-gc (its own JAR or Docker image,
not part of this project's docker-compose.yml today), doing a two-phase mark-and-sweep:
    - mark: walk every live named reference (branch, tag), apply a cutoff policy to
      decide which of its commits still count as "live," and record every Content
      reference (table/view version) those live commits point at.
    - sweep: for each table, use Iceberg's own metadata to map those live content
      references to actual data/manifest files, then delete files in the table's
      location that are not in that live set.
It deletes orphaned files only. It does not delete commits: a commit that becomes
unreachable from any branch's HEAD (this project's own 07-nessie-history-after-
rollback.json shows exactly this, hash_bad no longer listed) still exists as a row in
Nessie's store; nessie-gc's mark phase simply never marks its content as live, so its
data files become sweep-eligible once the cutoff policy for that reference makes it so.
The commit graph itself is never pruned automatically; the only tool that can do that
at all is the separate nessie-server-admin-tool's `cut-history` command, an advanced,
effectively irreversible operation (permanently removes parent pointers from a named
commit) meant for repositories with a genuine history-depth problem, not a routine
maintenance action. This project's commit volume (a dev laptop, not a busy production
catalog) does not come close to needing it, and it is not part of the policy below.

Cutoff policies (nessie-gc's --cutoff / --default-cutoff flags) support three shapes:
number of most-recent commits to keep, a duration relative to now, or an absolute
timestamp, and can be set per reference by regex pattern as well as globally. Nessie
GC's own documented default, if no cutoff is given at all, is NONE: every commit ever
made is treated as live and nothing is ever swept. That default is the wrong choice for
this project given the explicit constraint that storage must not grow unbounded on a
laptop, so the policy below sets an explicit cutoff everywhere rather than relying on
that default.

POLICY CHOSEN FOR THIS PROJECT
--------------------------------
Per-reference cutoffs, justified by how each reference class is actually used here:

    main=P14D
        Two weeks. main is the only branch real downstream consumers (dbt, Trino's
        static "iceberg" catalog, any future BI tool) ever read from. Two weeks
        comfortably covers a normal active-development iteration window (this
        project's own commit cadence, several commits per dbt run, means even a
        single day of active work generates meaningful history) without ever
        needing to time-travel further back than that in ordinary use. Nothing in
        the approved project plan calls for auditing history older than a couple of
        weeks; if that changes, this is a one-line policy edit, not a re-architect.

    wap_.*=P3D
        Three days. ops/wap.py already deletes a successful run's branch
        immediately after merge (its files are by then referenced from main anyway,
        so main's own P14D cutoff, not this one, governs them). This cutoff only
        actually matters for failed branches, which ops/wap.py keeps by default
        (--keep-failed-branch) specifically so a human can inspect what went wrong.
        Three days is enough time for that inspection to happen before the branch's
        files become sweep-eligible, short enough that a failed run nobody ever
        looks at again does not pin its data files indefinitely.

    time_travel_demo=P7D
        One week. This project's own demonstration branch (this work package) and
        the pattern any future purpose-built demo branch should follow. Worth
        calling out specifically: as long as this branch exists, it also holds live
        every real commit on main's history up to the point it was cut from (branch
        creation does not copy anything, it just adds a second name pointing at the
        same ancestry), so an uncapped demo branch would quietly pin an entire
        slice of main's own historical files live forever purely as a side effect
        of having been cut from main. A week bounds that side effect the same way
        it bounds the demo branch's own footprint.

    default-cutoff=P30D
        A conservative 30-day backstop for anything not matched above: a one-off
        scratch branch created and forgotten (this investigation itself created and
        deleted one, tt_scratch_probe, by hand; the backstop exists for the case
        where that deletion is forgotten), or any future reference pattern nobody
        thought to add an explicit rule for. Deliberately not NONE (Nessie GC's own
        default): this project's stated constraint is that storage must not grow
        unbounded, and an explicit backstop is the only way to guarantee that holds
        for references this policy did not anticipate.

WHAT WOULD ACTUALLY RUN THIS
------------------------------
Not automatic, and not built in this work package (explicitly out of scope: "out of
scope to build a scheduler here, just document what would run it"). The command a
scheduled job would invoke, once nessie-gc is added to this stack (it is a separate
artifact, not bundled in the nessie:0.108.4-java image this project already runs):

    java -jar nessie-gc.jar gc \
      --uri http://nessie:19120/api/v1 \
      --default-cutoff P30D \
      --cutoff 'main=P14D' \
      --cutoff 'wap_.*=P3D' \
      --cutoff 'time_travel_demo=P7D'

A weekly cron entry or, if this project ever adds a job scheduler for infra maintenance
(Dagster is already in this stack per docs/evidence/dagster/, but wired for the dbt DAG,
not infra housekeeping), a scheduled job definition pointed at the same command, is
what would actually run this on a cadence. Neither exists yet. Until one does, this
policy is a documented intention, not an enforced guarantee, and MinIO usage should be
spot-checked occasionally by hand (`du`-equivalent against the warehouse bucket) rather
than assumed bounded.
