Scenario 2: rename a column, field ids preserve historical readability.

Command run:
  ALTER TABLE iceberg.schema_evolution_demo.demo_billing_events
    RENAME COLUMN status TO txn_status;

Evidence:
  02-rename-column-before-metadata.json  raw metadata.json before (schema-id 1)
  02-rename-column-after-metadata.json   raw metadata.json after (schema-id 2)
  02-rename-column-before-query.json     SELECT event_id, status ... before rename
  02-rename-column-after-query.json      SELECT event_id, txn_status ... after rename
  02-rename-column-old-name-fails.txt    SELECT status ... after rename, real error

What the evidence shows:

Field id 5 is identical before and after:
  before: {"id": 5, "name": "status", "required": false, "type": "string"}
  after:  {"id": 5, "name": "txn_status", "required": false, "type": "string"}
Only the name key changed. current-schema-id moved from 1 to 2 and a third
schema entry was appended to the schemas array, metadata.json keeps every
historical schema version, it does not overwrite schema 1.

Querying by the new name returns the exact same values the old name
returned for the same rows before the rename:
  evt_000001: pending -> pending
  evt_001100: completed -> completed
No data file was touched, no data was moved. Querying by the old name after
the rename correctly fails to resolve ('status' cannot be resolved), Trino
has no fallback to stale names, the rename is a real rename, not an alias.

Why a Hive-style table cannot do this: a Hive-style (schema-on-read, name
and ordinal-position based) table has no independent field id layer. Column
identity there is the column name (or its ordinal position for very old
formats) baked directly into how each data file is decoded. Renaming a
column in a Hive metastore either (a) is implemented as drop-and-recreate,
losing the old data's association with the new name, or (b) requires
rewriting every existing file to update its embedded/positional column
name. Either way the historical data does not become readable under the
new name without a rewrite. Iceberg avoids this because the name-to-id
mapping lives only in metadata.json, not in the data files: every data file
is read by matching field ids from its own file-level schema (recorded at
write time) to the current table schema's field ids, and file to file
column name never has to agree with the current table name for that
column. Renaming is a pure metadata operation, hence no data-file rewrite
happens on the RENAME COLUMN command above.
