Scenario 7: a schema change Iceberg genuinely cannot absorb in place.

Commands run:
  ALTER TABLE demo_billing_events ALTER COLUMN event_id SET DATA TYPE integer;
  ALTER TABLE demo_billing_events ALTER COLUMN subscriber_id SET DATA TYPE bigint;

Evidence:
  07-unsafe-type-change-error.txt   raw Trino output, both attempts

Real errors returned (not assumed, not simulated):
  Query ... failed: Failed to set column type: Cannot change column type:
  event_id: string -> int

  Query ... failed: Failed to set column type: Cannot change column type:
  subscriber_id: string -> long

Both varchar-to-numeric changes were rejected outright by the same
connector-level check seen in scenario 3 (the narrowing attempt): Iceberg's
schema evolution only allows a small, enumerated set of primitive type
promotions (int -> long, float -> double, decimal precision widening,
and a couple of others), and string -> int / string -> long is not on
that list under any direction, there is no promotion path between a
variable-length text type and a fixed-width numeric type, unlike int ->
long which is a value-preserving reinterpretation. Trino's Iceberg
connector refuses the ALTER before it reaches the catalog, table state is
unchanged after both failed attempts.

This is a genuine limitation, not a workaround-able restriction: it exists
because Iceberg's in-place schema evolution guarantee only covers changes
where every already-written value under the old type has an unambiguous,
lossless reading under the new type. A string like "evt_000001" has no
such reading as an int or bigint. Iceberg's design deliberately does not
attempt a reinterpret-and-hope, it refuses instead.

The real migration path for a change like this (expand-contract, not
in-place):

  1. Expand: add a new column with the new type,
     ALTER TABLE demo_billing_events ADD COLUMN event_id_numeric bigint;
     leaving the old event_id column and all existing readers untouched.
  2. Backfill: populate the new column for existing rows from the old one
     via an UPDATE or, more practically for Iceberg, a rewrite pass
     (INSERT OVERWRITE / MERGE) that derives event_id_numeric from
     event_id wherever a real numeric identifier is recoverable, or from a
     new upstream source directly.
  3. Dual-write: for any new data landing in the same table going forward,
     populate both columns until every consumer has migrated, so neither
     column ever silently falls behind.
  4. Cut over consumers one at a time: update each downstream dbt model,
     BI query, or job to read event_id_numeric instead of event_id,
     verifying results at each cutover rather than moving every consumer
     simultaneously.
  5. Contract: once nothing reads the old column, drop it,
     ALTER TABLE demo_billing_events DROP COLUMN event_id;
     the same DROP COLUMN mechanism exercised in scenario 6, at that point
     a safe operation because nothing depends on the old name or type
     anymore.

This is the standard expand-contract migration pattern applied to a
warehouse table: the type change itself never happens in place, a
parallel column absorbs the new type, and the cutover is a consumer-by-
consumer migration with the old column staying live (and readable) for as
long as any consumer still needs it, precisely because Iceberg's
in-place evolution refuses to gamble on it.
